From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitrov. This is the Daily. [music]
These aren't people that work. These
aren't people that say, "Let's go. Come
on. [music] Let's make this place
great." These are people that do nothing
but complain.
>> During a cabinet meeting on Tuesday,
[music]
President Trump delivered perhaps the
most blatantly xenophobic public remarks
of his political career. and we're going
to go the wrong way if we keep taking
[music] in garbage into our country.
>> Attacking Somali Americans in Minnesota
and calling them garbage.
>> You know, they came from paradise and
they said this isn't paradise. [music]
But when they come from hell
and they complain and do nothing but
we don't want them in our country. Let
them go back to where they came from and
fix it.
Today, [music] my colleague Ernesto
Londano on the story of how Somali
became the [music] president's latest
target in his ongoing effort to reshape
America's relationship [music]
to its immigrant communities.
It's Thursday, [music] December 4th.
Ernesto, the president's comments about
Somali immigrants this week were, I
think for a lot of us, truly shocking.
Even for a president who's known for
making extreme comments about
immigrants, he called an entire group of
people garbage in a nationally televised
cabinet meeting. You're in Minnesota as
a national correspondent. So tell us,
how were these comments received there?
>> I think people here have been shell
shocked by the comments. I think they're
not [snorts] surprised that the
president would say things that are
disparaging of the Somali community or
about his immigration philosophy, but I
I do think the tone and tenor of what
was said at the White House yesterday
struck people here as just beyond the
pale. And it's induced a prevailing
sense of terror among the 80,000 or so
people of Somali ancestry that live in
the state. The vast majority of whom are
American citizens or legal permanent
residents
>> and they're a big part of the fabric of
Minnesota. They're ascendant in
politics. There's many Somali Americans
who are in the state legislature and
hold other local office. They are
business owners. They work bluecollar
jobs. They work in healthcare and the
idea that overnight their president
refers to them as garbage and says that
he wishes they would just all go home
was truly jarring.
>> Tell me about the terror that you
described. What is prompting the fear in
the community specifically? This week we
learned that the Trump administration
has deployed roughly 100 immigration
agents to come in and apparently look
for Somalis who are subject to
deportation orders. As we understand
that this is a fairly small pool of
people. We're talking about maybe a few
hundred people who have pending asylum
cases or for whatever reason came here
legally but fell out of status because
they may have committed a crime. So
what's happened is there's a sense that
a crackdown on immigration is starting
to take root in Minnesota and that
businesses and homes may become the
targets of immigration raids. What this
has meant so far is that people are
thinking twice about whether they feel
safe going to work even if they have
legal status and just people kind of
mulling whether they even feel
comfortable going to the grocery store.
And the fear is not merely about running
into immigration agents. The fear also
has become that this prevailing toxic
rhetoric about Somali and Somali culture
has empowered people who are racist to
do and say things that amount to
harassment and hatred. Hm.
>> I spoke to a Somali American immigration
lawyer who said he's been flooded with
calls, including from American citizens
who report just being taunted and
harassed on the street.
>> You're saying people are seeing this as
potentially giving people permission to
act on their worst instincts. It's a
permission structure.
>> Correct.
>> Okay. I want to talk about why this is
happening. why the federal government
has turned its attention to this
community of 80,000 people. In his diet
tribe, Trump hinted at the reason for
the hostility. He said that Somali had
stolen all of this money. This is a
story you've been covering, right? Walk
us through how Somali became the subject
of this vitriolic attack from the
president. Yeah, I think the origin of
this saga dates back to 2020.
And what happened was, you know, during
the early weeks of the pandemic, state
officials were really worried about
whether people were being fed, were
people going to be housed as many lost
their jobs. And as we all sort of
collectively descended into this fearful
moment induced by COVID 19. And there
was one specific program that state
officials were managing to keep
vulnerable kids fed during the pandemic.
[snorts] What happened was that turned
into a magnet for fraudsters who began
registering as meal sites saying that
they were feeding tens of thousands of
children when in reality what they were
doing was submitting bogus invoices and
stealing a staggering amount of money.
>> Right. This is something we've known
about, right? This was part of the
widespread fraud that we saw where
pandemic programs were taken advantage
of.
>> That's right. And even in the context of
the stunning amount of money that people
stole during the pandemic, targeting a
wide range of programs, including
business loans and unemployment
benefits. What happened in Minnesota was
unique in just the scale and officials
have described it as the most brazen
case of its kind just by the sheer
number of people involved and the amount
of money that was stolen.
>> How far did it actually go? Like what
are we talking about here in terms of
scale, in terms of scope?
>> Well, 78 people have now been charged in
the scheme in federal court. The vast
majority of them are Somali Americans.
More than 50 have already been convicted
in these cases. And initially, I think
many local officials were outraged that
this happened, but they essentially said
this probably was a one-off abuse during
the pandemic when there was a real sense
of urgency about getting money to people
who needed it.
>> Mhm.
However, in recent years, as prosecutors
dug into court records and as they
started interviewing witnesses,
something really jarring came to their
attention. This was not, in fact, a
[music] one-off. What they found was
that networks of people had found
loopholes in other programs that weren't
COVID pandemic era programs, but just
run-of-the-mill safety net programs
designed to help people at risk of
homelessness,
>> kids with autism, and that they were
charging a staggering amount of money
for services that weren't rendered. And
collectively, according to federal
prosecutors,
up to $1 billion has been stolen just in
these three schemes.
>> Remarkable.
>> And what state officials have said was
that fraud essentially became the
business model and that these people
were acting kind of above board. They
had office space that they leased all
around town. They had websites. They had
business cards. and they were sort of
stealing staggering amounts of money in
plain sight and state officials tasked
with overseeing and supervising these
programs were just paying the invoices
that came in.
>> Wow.
I spoke to a defense lawyer who has
represented people involved in some of
these schemes and he said that among the
people who were stealing money over the
years they kind of came to think that it
had become so easy to tap into these
funds and you know get rich fraudulently
that they kind of assumed state
officials were tolerating this if not
outright authorizing it. And the way he
described it was, you know, it was like
people were stealing from the cookie jar
one day and the next morning they had
refilled it.
>> You're saying this went far beyond just
pandemic fraud and that almost everyone
involved in these schemes was Somali
Americans. But if the figures were so
big, how did it go unnoticed?
That is a great question that state
officials are really struggling to
answer, but I think it's useful to go
back in time a little bit and kind of
remember the context in which this took
hold. So, there were red flags that
emerged in 2020 when money was gushing
into this program to feed children. And
when state officials felt overwhelmed by
the sheer number of business owners who
wanted in on the program, who wanted to
be serving meals and be reimbursed for
them, and when they started reviewing
the invoices that were coming to them,
they had questions. And those questions
were met with an extraordinary
accusation
>> which was what
>> the largest group that was organizing
meal providers in this program was
called feeding our future. It was a
nonprofit organization
and in response to questions from state
officials. They essentially said the
state was sloww walking these new
petition for people who wanted in on the
program because they were being racist
against East African immigrants. Hm.
>> And I think it's useful to remember what
was happening in the state at the time.
This fight is unfolding as Minnesota is
grappling with the aftermath of the
killing of George Floyd, which of course
set off a national reckoning over race.
So in the state at that time, nobody
wanted to be called a racist, even if it
was wholly unfounded. And I think the
consensus now among people who have
watched the sequence of events was that
that really had a paralyzing effect on
people in state government who knew
something funny was going on but didn't
really want to stick their necks out and
stop it.
>> Right. This was happening in a very
particular place at a very particular
time when tensions over race are
extremely high.
>> Correct. But I think there's another
layer to this and that is that Somali
Americans have become politically quite
powerful in the state and I think
Democratic lawmakers have seen them as a
really vital constituency and there were
instances in which the people who were
responsible for some of these fraud
schemes came to state lawmakers and
asked for help, asked for intervention
or became important donors. to their
campaigns. So, I think there is a sense
that beyond the threat of being called
racist, some Democratic elected
officials in the state were just really
worried that any action they took to
question or intervene in a way that
would maybe stop these schemes could
have alienated a really important
constituency.
>> Got it. So, there was a perceived
political risk there. Eventually though,
prosecutors do start to go after this,
right? So, as the details of this
yearslong billion dollar scandal start
to spill out into the open, do motans
start to reckon with how this threat of
accusing people of racism was used as a
tool to allow this fraud to go on?
>> Well, that certainly caused a huge
amount of outrage in the state, but I
don't think anything necessarily changed
in the immediate aftermath. It was
actually later, it was this year, this
summer, when there was a change of guard
at the local US attorney's office in
Minnesota. And what happened was the
prosecutor who had been leading these
fraud cases, Joe Thompson, became the
acting US attorney. And he took it upon
himself to really turn up the volume on
the nature and the scope of the problem.
He started giving press conferences and
interviews in which it started feeling
like he was doing more than just
indicting individuals who were
committing fraud. He started speaking in
a way that felt like he was indicting
the whole system that had allowed this
to metastasize. And his argument was we
can't indict our way out of this
problem. There's just too many people
who are stealing. There's too many
programs that are now vulnerable. And
unless and until people in the state
truly start wrestling with what has
taken root and start implementing
stronger safeguards, the state is going
to lose its ability to provide services
to people who actually need them. And in
my interview with him, he for the first
time addressed the racial dimension of
this and said that from his vantage
point, weaponizing allegations of racism
in Minnesota during the period when this
happened played a big role in inhibiting
a more forceful response from the kind
of people who could have stopped this on
the front end. So it is at this point a
place that's doing some soularching
about what happens when you know it's so
lacks in the enforcement of its own
rules and regulations around these
liberal policies that those policies
start to get taken advantage of and and
potentially end up turning people
against them.
>> Correct.
And in recent weeks we start seeing
lawmakers start asking some of the right
questions. we start seeing the governor
implement stronger safeguards to try to
prevent fraud and to detect fraud in
other programs. So, I think we're seeing
kind of the early phases of a
constructive reckoning that people here
were hoping would lead to less fraud.
However, once this issue crosses the
radar of the White House, once it's
something that captures President
Trump's imagination,
that reckoning starts to take a very
[music]
different shape.
We'll be right back.
Ernesto,
you just told us that things on the
ground in Minnesota have taken a very
different turn since Trump started to
focus on this. And I want to understand
that. But first, can we just get to the
question of why Trump decided to seize
on this right now? Because you've
described this scandal that's been
playing out in the background for a
while now, for years, with this steady
drum beat of revelations coming out over
time.
>> Yeah, I think there were a sequence of
events that turned this into a front
burner issue for the White House. The
first one was a report by Chris Rufo,
the conservative activist, which created
the inference that some of the money
that had been stolen in these schemes in
Minnesota had wound up in the hands of
terrorists in Africa, namely members of
the group al-Shabaab in Somalia. So,
this is a figure who has taken on
universities and has become very
influential in conservative circles. So
the fact that he drew attention to this
made it land in Washington DC
>> and Rufo here is specifically saying
that this money from the fraud that it
has a link to terrorism.
>> That's right. And to be clear,
prosecutors have drawn no such link.
None of these federal cases have
featured any link whatsoever to
terrorism. But nonetheless, the headline
on this piece was quote, "The largest
funer of al-Shabaab is the Minnesota
taxpayer."
>> Wow. Okay. So, that got a lot of
attention whether it was true or not.
>> That's right. And then a few days later,
we published a piece that walked readers
through how fraud got so pervasive in
Minnesota and that examined the role
racism and politics played in allowing
it to metastasize over the years. And
all this was happening at the same time
as people in the nation's capital were
reeling from that horrific shooting of
two members of the National Guard.
The gunman in that case was an Afghan
man who had been admitted in recent
years into the country. And I think that
added an element that the administration
had more political cover to be more
draconian in its immigration crackdown,
particularly as it pertained to
countries that are riven with
instability and conflict.
>> Right? This has really become a moment
where the administration has turned its
focus to specific groups of immigrants
from places that, as you said, have a
reputation for instability, for
conflict. And the message the White
House has been sending about these
people is that they're importing
cultures into America that are not
welcome. You know, Steven Miller,
Trump's domestic policy adviser,
recently posted this on social media. He
said, quote, "No magic transformation
occurs when people from failed states
cross borders." And then in his comments
on Tuesday, Trump seems to pick up right
where Miller left off.
>> That's right. And the desire by
President Trump and people in his circle
to limit immigration from specific
countries dates back to his first term,
obviously, and was met with tremendous
push back both from the public and from
the courts. I think now though they may
feel that they have a little more
leverage to push this through, to get
more people in handcuffs and out of the
country and to close the door to
American immigration based on
nationality. And at that cabinet meeting
on Tuesday, President Trump said the
United States was at a crossroads.
>> You know, our country is at a tipping
point. We could go bad. We're at a
tipping point. I don't know if people
mind me saying that, but I'm saying it.
Uh, we could go one way or the other.
>> He said that he was fed up with people
coming here from impoverished,
conflictridden countries and as he sees
it, leeching off the welfare state.
>> The welfare is like 88%.
They contribute nothing.
I don't want them in our country. I'll
be honest with you. Okay. Somebody would
say, "Oh, that's not politically
correct." I don't care. I don't want
them in our country. Their country is no
good for a reason. Their country stakes.
>> It also just strikes me that this is all
happening, this conversation so much
more out in the open than it was in
Trump's first term. I mean, I think a
lot of us will remember the comment that
Trump made about hole countries.
That was behind closed doors. That was a
comment made in private that was later
revealed. Now he's doing this in front
of his cabinet, in front of the cameras
rolling.
Yeah, I think there's a sense that in
this current era, they feel emboldened
to say the quiet part out loud and to
say things that would have been
unimaginable and careerending for
mainstream politicians in the not
[snorts] tooistant past. But all of a
sudden, we are seeing these ideas and
these notions become mainstream policies
and mainstream subjects of debate. And
to be clear, the people that Trump is
talking about here are Somali, most of
whom you've told us have legal status or
are citizens. So I want to ask given
that, what do you expect the ICE
operations to look like there? I mean,
what are they going to do? Who are they
looking for? Yeah, I think this is a
very challenging mission for ICE and I
think it's likely to look very different
from what we've seen earlier this year
in places like Chicago or Los Angeles.
You know, for starters, the number of
people who may be subject to deportation
appears to be pretty small. We may be
talking about just a few hundred people
who may have outstanding deportation
orders and who can sort of be put into
the system. And there's kind of a more
mundane challenge and that is that this
week has been bone chilling in Minnesota
and people are spending as little time
as possible on the streets and agents I
think are facing real pain if they're
out and about knocking on doors, staking
out businesses and residences. That in
and of itself is going to be a
monumental challenge for ICE. Can we
pull back here for a minute? Because
it's worth saying what we're seeing here
isn't just an immigration operation.
Trump's comments and these actions seem
to be just as much about delegitimizing
a group of people who either immigrated
here and became American citizens or
their parents did. The president is
calling into question their Americanness
and really calling into question whether
your ability as an immigrant or a child
of immigrants to call yourself an
American depends on where you're from.
>> Yeah, I think this is a really painful
question that Somali immigrants are now
wrestling with is, you know, what do you
do to prove that you're an American?
like to what length do you need to go to
truly feel like you belong and that
you're part of the fabric of this
nation? We're talking about people in
many cases who were born here and have
known no other homeland. Others arrived
here decades ago and have long
considered themselves patriots who have
been helping build the state, paying
taxes, working in really difficult jobs.
So yeah, I think this really leaves
people with unsettling questions about
what they need to do to be brought into
the fold of this country in this
political era and just how much further
will this crackdown and this cloud of
suspicion reach? What shape could this
take in the months ahead? And I'd
imagine whether their Americanness could
be called into question anytime a single
or a few members of their community make
a mistake.
>> Absolutely. You know, we've heard from
local elected officials who say they're
deeply concerned that the stage is set
for widespread civil rights violations.
>> The vast majority of our Somali
community are citizens. So what he who
he just attacked isn't just Somali. Who
he attacked is Somali Americans. who he
attacked as Americans.
>> St. Paul Mayor Melvin Carter look back
to history.
>> I believe that the sacred moments in
American history are the moments we've
had to decide who gets to be included in
the Wii. Do we mean black people? Do we
mean women? Do we mean immigrants? Who
is a part of the Wii when we say we the
people? And he said we should be
thinking of this moment as one that may
define who we are as Americans and as a
nation.
>> And Ernesto, what about the reckoning
that you described happening in
Minnesota around the original scandal
that prompted all of this, the fraud? I
mean, you had said that the state was
really starting to have a conversation
about how this fear of being perceived
as racist or called racist, the fear of
a backlash had led to this very
well-intentioned system being totally
corrupted. Where does that conversation
stand now?
>> Yeah, it's going to be fascinating to
watch how this unfolds in the months
ahead.
You know, on the one hand, we're in a
moment where nobody can turn a blind eye
to the fact that fraud is a huge and
systemic problem for Minnesota. There's
going to be a governor's election next
year. And [music] Tim Walls, who's a
Democrat, could lose that race if
[music] the people who are challenging
him on the right from the Republican
party succeed in making [music] fraud
the defining issue in the race.
I think there's broad agreement that you
need systemic change and that you need
strong safeguards. And I think also
we're starting to see a reckoning among
people in the Somali community about the
fact that this is a big problem and has
created a significant perception issue
that many people are now paying the
price for. [music]
But just as you know, Minnesota seemed
ready to start having a more frank and
constructive conversation about race and
even to just talk about the fact that
Somali were largely responsible for
these cases of fraud. It's now been
bulldozed by the debate over immigration
and the xenophobic rhetoric that we're
hearing from the president.
>> Right?
>> It's going to be really hard to
disentangle these two issues. [music]
And I think the pragmatic change that
you know will likely happen in the
months ahead [music]
is going to be really hard to divorce
from the national politics.
[music]
>> Well, Ernesto, thanks so much.
>> Natalie, it's been a pleasure.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Wednesday, [music]
President Trump announced a plan to
weaken fuel efficiency requirements for
tens of millions of new cars and light
trucks, [music]
calling them a scam. It was his latest
move to [music] gut fuel restrictions
put in place by the Biden administration
to help address climate change. [music]
Trump said the efficiency requirements
made cars too costly for automakers to
build [music] and too expensive for
Americans to buy. The administration
claimed the new [music] rules would
shave $1,000 off the cost of a new car.
>> [music]
>> And in a report that's scheduled to be
released on Thursday, the Pentagon's
acting inspector general said that
defense secretary Pete Hgsith [music]
risked endangering American troops
earlier this year when he used a private
messaging [music] app to discuss
military plans. The Pentagon's internal
inquiry [music] centered on Hexath's
role in a group chat on Signal, the
encrypted messaging app, [music] where
he discussed imminent strikes in Yemen
with other senior Trump officials.
The chat became public [music] because a
journalist was added to the group by
mistake.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Diana Wyn, Nina Feldman, and Stella Tan.
It was edited by MJ Davis Lynn [music]
and Michael Benois. Contains music by
Alicia Etup and Marian Lozano. And was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
That's it for the daily. [music] I'm
Natalie Kitroof. See you tomorrow.